---
layout: post
title: TDD Rules in Any Language
keywords: TDD, C Development
---


I'm working on a very complex problem on my master's class, it deals
with structural approaches to apply the bat metaheuristic on GPU.
Beyond this big challenge, I wasnt used anymore to C development. The
last time I made something for real with C was about 3 years ago
and back then I had little experience, for that, I started this
challenge with little confidence.

Soon in the process I felt some mistrust of the behavior of the code.
And as complexity increases this mistrust did as well. And when
unexpected results appeared I started to became crazy and did a lot of
suffered debug. Maybe there are some overwrite of memory biasing
the values? Maybe there's something I don't understand happening
with the random numbers?

The thing is, when you have too much complexity is to easy to
don't feel confident about your code. I suffered a lot for one week or two
until I embraced unit tests on C. Sure, I should had embraced TDD
since the beginning, but as I said, I didn't had the confidence to
do it. Here that maximum applies: the developer don't take the
time to go fast.

Anyway, it seems that it's not at all that common, TDD on C, the most
starred library I found was Unity, and it has about 0.3k likes. But
certainly the major benefits of unit testing apply for as as much as for
any other language. I even feel inclined to say that C is a perfect
language for testing, since you're forced to define contracts on header
files and include the "concrete" one's at compile time (ideal for
mocking), it's a kind of forced dependency inversion that
the language design enforce.

But in resume, now I'm much more confident of the behavior of my
algorithm. I can say to my advisor, with confidence, that the behavior
is expected given the premises.

And, as a bonus, I found a bug on Unity and sent them a pull
request which  is already merged.
